We opted, you know, back in the 70s to someday keep
the boundaries around the Woodlands so that it
cannot be a separate subdivision. That's very
important, a separate political subdivision,
you know, in the town, because it has to answer
Houston's need. That was the whole philosophy at
the beginning of the philosophy. Mr. Mitchell,
let's start back, if you will, and tell us, if you
think the Woodlands has built out as you
anticipated that it would, 20 years ago or so when
you began this project. Well, I would say this as
far as what we hear from the people and whether it
has done very well. I talk to people all the time
because we live out here, and they're sincere.
They say, I've been here eight years now, and I want
to tell you it's the best place I've ever lived. I
mean, hundreds of people tell me that, and I don't
think they do it just to bother me out. They do it
because they're sincere about it. And what do they
point to? I would say this, that the... The fact
that we're probably behind schedule something
you've had, but three high-energy, not
high-energy, but also high-interest peaks that
slows down production of the crash of Houston in
the last six, seven years. When we first opened in
74, the interest rates had gone through the
ceiling. I'll just give you, we went through about
three cycles of high-interest rates, the crash of
Houston. But in spite of all that, the wooden has
done very well. But I'd say we're You know, we're
behind our schedule. We thought we'd probably be
45,000 people. By now, we're 32,000 people. So
we're doing quite well. So in terms of physical
size, it's not where you really anticipated
being. In terms of pace, it's not exactly where we
originally thought it would be. But as far as the
quality and as far as doing well from a land
development standpoint, it's profitable on land
development. On our capital structure, on office
buildings and apartments, it'll take a while for
those to be profitable on cash flow basis, and they
looked very promising. So I think that, in
general, the Woodlands have done very well. In
fact, I have to say that, you know, I've always
studied all new towns in the world. I went to
Europe, I looked at France, I looked at England, I
had Dick Brown go to Capiola, I'd go to Sweden, I
looked at the West Coast, I looked at the East
Coast, Columbia, I took some of the people from
Columbia, some of the people from from Irvine and
merged them in because there was no one in Houston
originally knew the magnitude of that project.
Columbia was the second generation of Newtown.
Levittown was the first generation of Newtown.
And we're the third generation over Columbia. And
I would say this, that we're pulling it off, I
think, quite well. In fact, it's unique in the
country, in my opinion. If you look at all major
projects in the country, None of them have done the
entire fabric that we have put together between
the social structure, the environmental
structure, and maybe the economic structure.
Irvine is much better economically. Is it?
Irvine's done very well, but the land cost was very
low. I think Goldberg of New York Times, he really
criticized it about a year ago. That's the
argument, Goldberg. Because it's just a sea of
roost. Here, you go right through the wilderness,
32,000 people, you don't see anything. What we did
to preserve the natural appearance of the
wilderness was, I think, was rather unusual. And
then how do you really environmentally do that and
still make a profit? That's a tough one. Right,
that's the trick. In other words, I could crash
every tree down and turn around and get more lots or
get more office building, but that isn't what we
do. We try to design with nature. We try to design
the social structure with each other, and we try to
have to make a profit out of it. And I'd say this is
coming along well. If I looked at all the projects
in the country, look at Reston, Virginia,
Columbia, Maryland, Irvine, Westlake, all the
ones on the west coast, all the HUD projects, which
none of them have really been, that have made it
except the Woodlands, that had no default. I would
say that this should stand out, in my opinion, as
something unusual and unique. Now, how do we
convince the world, that's what it is. And how do
they gain on what we have done? Which is why I have
you people working on this. How do you really
document this so other people can do the same thing
on the next generation? To go through our case
history, which we wrote the first book, as you
know. And therefore, we're trying to get the
factual information over the next 10 years of what
it was since the first book. How that was put out.
You're documenting that. We're also doing a
picture essay on the Woodlands now, which is
different than what you're doing. And then after
you finish your factual study. What I'll do is to
get maybe some other writers to go back from the
beginning and do it on a combined documentary, but
really have a flowing language that relates to a
little different approach to it. You see what I
mean? Sure. That's what I think we should do.
Because the picture essay could be a coffee table
thing for all families in the world or wherever
else, you know, credentials or whatever it is. The
other one is really what you, the first book and the
second book that you're doing, or the facts you're
getting together, really gives you how this was
done. And is it successful? And with all the warts
that you can find and all the pluses that you can
find, you see. What are the warts and the pluses
that you see right now? Well, I would say there's a
lot of warts. I think that it's extremely
difficult financially to make these things work.
And I think this, that... that if you don't have the
holding power or staying power and you don't show
profit the first 10 years cash flow, most
corporations won't take it. They won't take it.
They won't look at the mid-term, long-term like
we're looking at it. They look at it too
short-term, next quarter, next year, next two
years, and they won't take them on. I think that if
it's successful over a long period of time, that it
does have a good rate of return, which I think it
will have, then more major whatever it is, pension
funds, corporations, insurance companies,
might take them on as investment. Now, the rest has
been taken over by mobile. It went through three
ringers of being more or less in the bankruptcy. So
they're doing real well. They're happy with the
rest of it. So the real key to a new community is the
finance structure behind it. I would say that is
the most difficult thing to do, financing and
getting it, and knowing that it's a long waiting
period to see that the cash flow turns around.
Irvine could do it quicker because they own the
land that started with the Pitch, Cincinnati. We
had to buy the land at higher cost, you see, and most
other people do, too. But I think that's the most
difficult. Then, of course, there's always the
complications of here we turn around the
woodlands and we we've got we've got
environmental impact study with the first one
ever done by hud and we designed our roads and all
our things and built an enormous infrastructure
for the future and now they come back and say oh too
bad now we're going to look at environmental
impact again by pieces yeah see that's really
disturbing oh we got a new uh wetlands ordinance
that's coming out now that stops your development
here in fact all of houston we're doing pretty well
because we did have an early impact in And they're a
little bit more liberal with us, but Houston's in
trouble unless they get the law changed on what is
wetlands, you see. Those retroactive type things
really are very, very serious for developers to
think about. My gosh, they just spend several
hundred million dollars on roads and
infrastructure and everything, and they change
the rules on you. Those are the dangers we have.
Then, we've done very well with the city of
Houston, because we're in their external
jurisdiction. We've done very well with the
Montgomery County, because we're getting more
and more commercial people here, because we've
been working good tax abatements and things with
Montgomery County. And that political strain is
pretty well eased? The original strain was very
stiff. Since then, they realize that Woodland's
their future tax base. And they're working with
it. And the school's working with it. So that's
working good. We're able to get the toll road up. It
was extremely important. As you know, it was very
important. But you see, we're convinced The city,
if you didn't get to the airport, why spend a
billion on the airport? You couldn't get there. I
mean, how are you going to get to the airport? Are
they going to go in a helicopter? So, therefore,
Lindsay, if I wouldn't do it, Lindsay would step in
and do it. The total was really to serve all of
North. Harris County and Montgomery County. It
wasn't just for the women. It just so happened to
come right by here because we're on the way. So,
it's extremely important. I think that the... The
various things in the River Authority we work with
have been very well on our water systems and our
source treatment plant systems. We've really had
really great cooperation with entities like
that. The federal regulations that come back
retroactive are the most serious thing that would
cause large developments to worry about whether
you can get it done. And that's what you're going to
be working with and against in the future. And yet
we think we can work it out, because we do have, we
designed it that way to start with. kept 7,000
acres of wood claims that we wouldn't touch out of
25,000 acres. One thing that we did do is to really
preserve the forest. It's rather interesting.
The original concept is how you design a forest and
end up with 150,000 people and not destroy it. Now,
that's a very difficult thing to do. And I think
that so far it's working very well. And we keep the
natural. You drive around the woods, you don't
understand. We don't have a bunch of manicured
lawns and a bunch of all the freeways manicured, a
bunch of flowers all over the place. It's all the
natural. One thing we've run into, incidentally,
is that you're having to educate the people who
live here how to live. That's right. See, every
home that comes in here, we give them a booklet.
Have you seen the booklet? The new booklet?
They've got a very nice booklet. You're talking
about a very sensitive subject to me, George. The
lot next to me was just cleared yesterday. That's
another... They cleared it? Yeah. Well, who was
the builder? Lee. Who? Bill Lee. Well, why don't
you get a hold of our design committee and kick
their butts? As far as I can tell, everything they
do... Did they clear a lot of the trees? It's
practically... They're building to the lot
line... That's your design committee. You've got
some input from the community association. Raise
hell with them. I'm going to raise hell. All right.
But you've got to do it before it happens. It's too
late. I know, but then, no, I think that you've got
to raise hell or it won't happen again, Joe. You're
a guinea pig, Joe. Sorry. How do you build that
infrastructure, though, that can keep this kind
of world and value system going? Very difficult.
We fight hard for the trees. We raise hell with this
wall market, clearly, and yet There's no doubt
when you develop, you're going to cause some
damage to the trees. There's no doubt about it. But
I'll say this, that I think we've done,
considering you see 32,000 people and you can't
already see them in the buildings, we've done a
remarkable job, even though we have some like
Joey, and that's something we've got to get into,
Joe, to see why it happened and to get a better
control of that. So I get upset about it, too,
because I go around a lot and I see things, and I
think that it's very important to do that. But the
Greenland people, they don't understand why they
read like the Woodlands. They come out here and
live, because we have hiking bike trails
everywhere, you know. And we have, we designed the
roads for 150,000 people to start with. And we
designed the overpass, which costs us some trees.
I don't want to do that, but then you've got that
trade-off. I mean, I would get one to grow in the
middle, and I hate to do it, because it's going to
lose that beautiful layer of trees I'm going to
lose. Or some of them. So I think we have to really
figure out how you have the feeling of my own people
You fight hard to do your design accordingly, and
that's very difficult. Forget about the buyer. He
doesn't know better, apparently. But there are
people who now have to train the 24 builders. Their
superintendents don't do it, and in fact, they're
not supposed to cut any tree down that was six
inches at all. If they did, Joe, you ought to raise
hell without permission. If they did, I want to
know about it. You tell me about it. Well, you
couldn't put the house there if the tree's there.
Well, I admit that some thing is right in the middle
of a lot to do something. But there's some things
that you could do something by changing your
location around and miss some of those things. But
however, it's a very difficult thing to urbanize
and think you're going to keep it completely
pristine. You can't do that. So you have to know
there's some trade-offs. But what people don't
realize about the Woodlands They drive around.
They don't understand why it's so strikingly
beautiful, because of the natural look. And you
have buildings that reflect the trees on the side
of the building. You have natural landscaping
around the building. You don't have a bunch of
flowers around the building. A few places of
color, we have a few places. But even then, we work
on them. So I think that is important. The thing is,
the social structure is important. Economic base
is very important. So how do you put it all
together? We have schools. We have great schools
that work hard with the Conway School District.
With the private school, the Cooper Private
School, we're funding the U of H out here now. We've
got community college ready to come out here now.
We have the high tech. We've got about 1,200
scientists and assistants over there now in the
high tech area. That's beginning to evolve. If you
get up to 5,000, it'll be a critical mass. We're
finally convincing A&M and all them they ought to
get involved in the Woodlands, because that's
where the action's going to be through HARC. And
they're beginning to come alive. It's all part of
history. Southwest, Texas, and the nation. And
therefore, this could be a role model. I've looked
at Kingwood and First Colony and Clear Lake.
They're nice. But they're not like the Woodlands.
Could you expand on one of the things you just said?
One of the things, the strategic initiatives in
the Woodlands that is little understood because
it's very subtle, is the... the obvious, at least
obvious to me, effort that you've gone to to
develop an industrial, commercial background as
well as the residential. The residential, you
know... See, our objective, 150,000 people here
eventually, in 30 or 40 years from now, is to have
100,000 jobs, maybe more. And that's important.
I'm not a suburb. I'm not a little subdivision.
We're really, we're not a new town, because we've
got to be part of the whole, part of Houston. And
that's why we opted that Houston, see, in 72,
Houston did not, they barely had what they call a
five-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction, and
they barely touched our south end, barely five
miles from the city limits. I had the choice of
saying, okay, we'll make a separate political
subdivision up here, or be part of Houston. Well,
philosophically, I don't think you can feed off
the airport, off the infrastructure fusion, off
the port, and not be part of the whole. If the talent
that flees to the suburbs, in fact, the Woodlands
concept was put together for that reason. In the
60s, when I went to, I saw Bedford-Stuyvesant in
New York. I saw Watts. And the concern is that, how
do you urbanize better? How do we do it better? Or
are you going to have, like, Los Angeles and
Washington have these 100 political
subdivisions Strangling the central core where
it can't manage itself? Or can you make it be part of
the whole? The town of Woodlands better make
Houston work. Because you're going to be part of
Houston. Because the brain drain and the tax drain
goes to the suburbs. Is that working the way you
thought it would, though, the Houston-Woodlands
connection? One thing I haven't been able to do yet
is to build the whole cross-section of the
socioeconomic and ethnic mix. And I won't for 40
years. And it'll never be 35%.
black and 35% Hispanic. It'll probably be 15%,
10-15% black and 10-15% Hispanic. I'm just giving
you what I think we're having 40 years from now. So
you don't make the social ethnic mix that you
think, or economic mix. However, we had up to about
three years ago, 14% run assist people in the
woods. Now in the last three years with all these
cheap houses that went on RTC, A lot of people
bought these $60,000 condominiums for $30,000,
and we didn't get them up here because there's no
market up here. But now we're getting back to
thinking about townhouses and cluster houses and
getting a medium range. It used to be about $68,000
per medium house. Now it's up to $120,000, and I
don't like that. I'm trying to bring it down again
by starting now that those things have dried up, go
back into townhouses and cluster houses to build a
lower end. When I used to get rent assistance from
HUDS, programs I was able to build some more
because one thing we did here in the Wilmington
very unusual is the design of the Wilmington
itself you can't take a $40,000 house and put a
million dollar house next door it won't work I
don't care what the social scientists tell you it
might work it won't work so we designed what you
call the Pollyanna effort that's where you took a
$40,000 to $70,000 house it's 30, 40 in this
cul-de-sac and a layer of trees, and then you put
the semi to $100,000 houses, a layer of trees, and
so on, until you find you've got a billion-dollar
house. Every village has a whole cross-section.
And they all go to the same school, same shopping
area. Now, that's the concept of the woodland that
we're able to put out because we're able to use the
forest to help us do that. And that's the concept
that I'm trying to work here. Now, I would say this.
My median price has gone up higher than I'd like to
see it. I'm trying to push it down now that the RTC
has stopped all these give-away sales, where then
we can do it. Because our value stayed pretty good
for once. And all this downturn, our value may have
lost 8% to 10%, not 30%, 40%. And they already
bounced back and created big demand for sales of
used houses at this time, and resale houses now.
Because the values have been here. That's one
thing that has changed. Houston would buy a house
in every little subdivision around the town. They
don't do that anymore. Well, we had in 1982 about 2%
of the Houston market. We now have 8.5% of the
Houston market, because they feel the security is
here, the quality of life is here, the job
opportunity is here, the access to Houston is very
good, and therefore we have a great impact on the
whole urbanization process. And there, when
Houston gets to be, the key is, when Houston gets to
be 6 million people, which it will be, How do we do it
better? That's the whole concept of the
woodlands. Is that percentage holding up for jobs
also? Oh, yeah, jobs are really, we're up 8,500
jobs right at this time in the woodlands. I would
say our percentage is pretty good. I don't know
exactly. We relate percentage of people living in
the woodlands. We have 11,000 households in the
woodlands. We've got 8,600 jobs. That's not bad.
We hope to have eventually a percentage of 100,000
jobs, 150,000 people, so the percentage is not too
far from the original concept. But if you're
asking whether the Woodlands has 8.8% of the
Houston job market, is that what your question is?
Oh, no, we don't have that. No, we don't have that. A
new growth we may have, you see. But our growth is of
8.8% of new housing, not resale housing. And I'm
not so sure of our jobs are picked up from 7,000,
8,500 the last couple of years, so I don't know what
that percentage is compared to total job pick-up.
Houston total job pick-up has been about 60,000 a
year for the last two years, so if you took 8% of
that, that would be about, I'm not so sure, we're
pretty close to that. If we went from 7,000 to 8,500
jobs, And a Houston pick-up of jobs was about
$50,000, $60,000 one year, and $40,000 the other
day, $100,000, and 8% of that would be $800,000. So
we picked up more than that. We picked up more than
that. So your rate is ahead of the Houston rate. Our
rate, our ratio probably is ahead of the Houston
ratio. I'm just going to give you a guess. I'd like
to run the numbers for you, but that's a guess. So
that's working pretty well. But we have built an
opportunity for different types of jobs. Office
space, high technology, service industries.
therefore these and working with use advanced
research center to figure out how the fallout
could be on that how we work with venture capital
coming which we helped defend someone here so it's
all all in here that you don't find it clear lake you
don't find it one colony you don't find the rest and
you don't find it come up you don't find it west lake
you don't find urban now that's that's why it's
different then the key to the woodland is the
beauty that we're able to preserve so far that i
think is why people I keep saying, gee, it's the
best place I've ever lived. Well, no, no, but the
social structure for the kids have been good. The
hike and bike trail, we've got over 65 miles now. I
think of hike and bike trails in the woodlands, et
cetera. And those are things that. Have there been
any surprises along the way in terms of the social
structures and in terms of the business
developments? Well, I think that the church has
done a good job through the interfaith group.
We've had an amazing reaction among the church
groups that come into Woodlands, they all help
each other get started. It's really worked better
than I thought. We thought about ecumenical
churches to begin with. Well, you'll notice in the
book, we felt that wouldn't work. Churches this
competitive is like people are. But what has
happened, the Native faith has worked with them.
We have some 20 churches or so here now. There's
been sharing of facilities. Sharing of
facilities. And yet, as they get bigger, it's
going to get more difficult, as you know, the whole
thing. I think that... Yeah, there are a lot of
surprises, like where we were disappointed when
we had the University of Houston line up and come up
with their north campus. But we're going to get a
rather reduced size north campus, because they
couldn't get it over. We've been sitting out there
waiting for 20 years now. And when I first went
through the wood in the 69 with them, where they
said, OK, we'll make a deal with you. The boarding
board said you'll have a south campus, which was
going to be Clear Lake, and a north campus. Well,
they backed off now when they took the downtown
campus on it. They said, well, that's your other
campus. I heard us, you see. So, however, we're
going to get something out of it. Has the transfer
of authority to the local community gone pretty
much according to the? I would say it hadn't gone to
us. We still control the WCA. However, we lose
control in 92. I'd say if one thing that we wish we'd
have done better is that since our pace is not as
what it was, I would have liked to have had another
10 years to have control of the WCA, but we think we
can work with them. We work with Conroe and
Montgomery County. We can work with them as long as
you do a good job. And I think that they should be
watchdogs of what's best for the community. Oh,
that's one of the brilliant things that was done is
the fact that impregnated into the social
structure is, in fact, the values, the
philosophical values of the Woodlands. Because
as I've talked to various individuals, one of the
questions I've asked is, what happens when the
hand of George Mitchell is not on the helm? How will
this continue? And everyone says, it won't
continue. It's not a problem. Yeah, really,
they've been indoctrinated pretty well. And I
think it's worked real well. As you get up to
100,000 people, I can't predict what will happen.
But I do think that if you go to 6 million people in
Houston region, which it will in the next 25 years.
In fact, we even tried thinking about back late 69,
70, working with Ann McCarg, who did our
environmental planning, to do what I call the
String of Pearls, where we would really have five
projects similar with a different size,
different character, within all of the beauty of
southern Montgomery County and the city here. So
you think that might be a future for the... No, no,
we're still working on it. But I gave up when things
got tough. I didn't have time for it. But we, McCarg
and I, worked on the idea, and he wanted to do it. So
we now have our people looking at what would be like
for wood trace. We're getting ready to do one now.
They're compact, 2,800 acres. A bit different,
1,800 acres. You'll never do 125,000 acres again.
I don't know who could put this block together. 300
transactions put the block together. So the
string of pearls still has a lot of interest to me.
How do you really make the whole 6 million people
work together and have transportation and have
the orientation that makes it work better than
what's going on in the rest of the country? That's
interesting. One thing you're saying, too, is the
future for the Woodlands Corporation far beyond
the Woodlands. Far beyond the Woodlands. I'm
thinking about all of Houston. And really, I'm
thinking about urbanization in the country. Not
only this state, but all other states. You think
about why do you have the horrible mess you have in
New York City with 100 political subdivisions or
Washington or Detroit? We might be able to avoid
that if we work together. And you may not. What we
think would be wrong, because there'd be a lot of
other things that come up that we never saw for
some. But I do think the idea of how you really
urbanize better, if you think people are all going
to move inside the loop in Houston, I don't believe
that. Because if you offer all this opportunity of
job base and everything else, and yet tie into the
cultural base, or the airport base, or the port
base, that's what I think you have to do. And then we
argue about trying to match transit now. But the
mass transit used to know how to think about the
overall plan, not just go from the Galleria
downtown, which is ridiculous. Two billion
dollars, or a billion and one, they ought to go to
the hospital. But then how do you really tie the six
billion people you're going to have together with
commuter things and then inline rails, I mean, to
the airport certainly and a few other places, or
maybe Galleria then. But how do you look at the
whole? And they're not looking at that whole. It
bothers me. I'm on the executive committee. I
fought hard to do it a different way, but we've had
one. But you don't have to have light rail as time
goes on. I agree with that, the rail. And with the
mobility of the freeway systems, and the world is
just part of it. So my concern is that how do we
urbanize 6 million people? How do you do a better
job than the rest of the country? So I think that's a
good example of just being an example. For the
next, let's sort of project ahead, for the next
five years, ten years, and so forth, where do you
see the main focus of your activities and the
Woodlands activities, say, in the next five
years? I notice you're building 970 new units,
housing units? Yeah, we leave the town area, leave
this area. I would say this, that we're
concentrating on the residential, but I think now
we're beginning to come alive at the high-tech
area. The search forests are looking very
promising. Also, the idea that I think the
commercial is going to begin to build this way,
because it follows the people. Office space will
begin to build this way. There'll be more
headquarter companies coming here with quality
of life. And that all should happen within the next
five years. You see a lot. That's right. We see a lot
of that. We think that we begin to see we're going to
get the mall put together, we hope, in the next six
months or so to get the mall started. We see
additional offers. Right now, you cannot bill an
office building at what price they'll offer you.
There's no billing unless you can afford to build a
new one. But that's getting to the point now where
it's just about to break over. So we'll get more of
that. Our apartments are very hot. Our apartments
are 95% leased up. We're going to do more
apartments. To get to 54,000 units, you have to do
more cluster housing, townhouses and
apartments, and still preserve 7,000 acres of the
Greenbelts. And the thing is that, so those are
things that I think the next five and ten years
should begin to show, well, this project is really
going to be economically viable. People
certainly doubt it, and still, it's doing well on
land development, but still all the
infrastructure has to show it makes economic
viability, you see. So we think that we do. And
then, mainly, also working with the 32,000 people
in the 40,000 and 50,000. How do you really work the
relation of what we're trying to do to have it keep
going on and yet correct something that we know
we've done wrong? Do you think simply the shared
growth is going to markedly alter the complexion
of the women? I think it changes the complexion.
But what's really happened in the last 10 years, we
didn't predict. We created the Houston Advanced
Research Center. I thought I'd have a University
of Houston site. I didn't get that one. OK, so that
was one of the surprises that came along. But then
we decided to say an intellectual center is still
going to be an intellectual center. So we worked
the Houston Advanced Research. And when I got all
four universities to work with us, we're not
teasing whether or not they do the research. So our
research ambition has really, really
skyrocketed. Because I think the technology
transfer is so important for the future of the
state. When we say, well, depletion and land
depletion can't sustain the whole state, we'd
better get better adapted to get your technology
into the marketplace, which is what the park is
supposed to do. So maybe this is a richer and more
unique environment than the one you originally
conceived of in terms of academics. I think it will
be. I would say that if you're not careful, it would
be an elitist environment. You don't want to talk
completely, you see. So you want to be sure that you
have As I say, the old cross-section of
socioeconomic and ethnic mix as much as possible
over a period of 50 years. And therefore, we want
the segment of it to be because that's it. But then
you've got to be careful it's not just strictly all
of that, you see. This string of pearls, as you
mentioned, intrigued me a lot. But obviously,
there's going to be some differences, not just in
size. It won't be like it wasn't. You'll never get
one $25,000. You may have $3,000 here, $5,000
there. You have this concept, maybe near Compact.
You have another concept over on this side here.
But it's all related and has transportation
related to the central core. Oh, I see. Okay.
Houston is still your hub, your port, your
airport, your downtown. The whole thing has still
got to be viable. And that's why I say the commuter
lines ought to be sure that they do that. If you had
good commuter lines, which I think we'll work out
with the railroads. We're not working on one here.
We're getting ready to do some things here to tie
in. Because they're going to go to the airport.
They may do their high-speed train. They're going
to go by A&M. They're talking about . And I think
this, and they're not even talking about going by
airport. I can't believe we're going to let them
get over that. Because we're trying to be sure they
touch our airport, too, if they do high-speed
train. They're going to do Dallas-Fort Worth
there, but not ours. That's what I heard. Yeah,
that's what I heard. So we're always raising hell
about that. But we were negligent in not getting
it. We're too busy fighting our own rail battle.
And if we didn't get into that, we should have got in
earlier. But I mean, I think that the concept I have
is, Why did the nation have all this trouble in
urbanization, and we got trouble in every big
city? You have riots, you've got all the problems,
you've got the school system is in chaos. I mean,
just look at it. The nation's going downhill. No
question about it in my mind. How do you urbanize
better? And this is an example, not just for
Houston, but for Texas, but for the nation to see
how you urbanize better, and how we take six
million people and make it better. And you do
otherwise. I have little subdivisions here in the
downtown going to hell, and they don't give a damn
about the downtown, because they're out there in
their little enclave, a little political
subdivision, and you try to get tagged to hell with
you, and they'll probably go use your airport
report. I mean, that's the kind of thing that's
going on. And so I think the women's is a good
example. It's unique, from what I can tell. And
it's very well... They should see that. I just saw
it the other day, they won a choice made on new
towns. Yeah. Have you seen that video we had done? I
saw it on the PBS station. I
had to go to Irvine and Reston and a couple of others
and listen. It was very, very good. It was very well
done. In fact, she won a bronze, she said, on that
one for recognition. But the thing is this. Those
are things I think we have to really see. What we're
saying is a outgrowth of what I saw in the 60s. about
the danger of our cities. And this is what the
Woodlands is about. Is your tape still running? Is
it a four and a half hour tape? Yeah, it's 45
minutes. OK. But you feel like the Woodlands has
pretty well met your expectations. It is. It has
also been on the- Rainy growth is slow because you
had three high interest rates peaks and you had a
downturn in Houston. But still, it's certainly
done very well. And residents are doing well.
We're the leaders now. Our prices are quite good.
We are now, I would say, poised to really do the high
technology thing, do the university bit with the
community college. We're poised to get the
shopping mall and also more office space up here.
We tied into Houston better with the toll road and
the airport. So I think that we're really right on
the threshold of really very excellent growth in
the next 10 years. And Houston will probably come
out of the hole. And it's the kind of community you
hoped it would be. That's right, it is. I tell you
why I know, because I guess we go, Cynthia and I, we
live out here. But then we go either, and you can't
believe how many people come and say, I live here, I
live in Connecticut, I live in California. They
know they're going to find us. I've been there
since they were about, I mean, they were there. And
you can tell, why would people come home and just
say that? So I guess when you go around and ask
people, you'll find the same thing. And you'll
find that when you ask people, well, really, what
is it? Is it? Does it match your expectations or
whatever it is? Which brings me to my last
question. I've asked everybody that we've
interviewed this question. I've never gotten a
decent answer. Never gotten a good answer.
Obviously,
there's a lot of self-satisfaction that you get
out of doing this. Manifestly, you intended to
make money out of it. But you didn't get into this
just to make money. No. There's more than that.
What really is your motivation? Why are you so
wedded to the concept of the woodlands? Well,
because of the urbanization problems of the
nation. In other words, I saw back in the 60s that I
didn't think we were doing the right thing. I think
we can do a better job. And that's what it's all
about. And then to design it and execute it is a
difficult task. It really is. To really have a
concept and see if you can get it to work is
extremely difficult and complex. And we've got a
good team that was part of it. Sir, incidentally,
that's one thing we have noticed, that the people
you brought in here from the first are still here.
And I think that's a testimony to that. It is. We've
got a good team. Strength of government space. And
we're trying to get the best of strength of all the
East Coast and West Coast to bring them in, because
there wasn't a bunch of knowledgeable people,
architects or planners at that time in the late
90s, late 60s. So I think this is what...
satisfaction, but I really think that that is why
it isn't just to make money for Houston, although
it's important for Houston or the state of Texas. I
think it's a role model that could be used in many
other areas, and that's why I'm trying to get the
documentary so people study the case history of
this, wherever it is, and say, well, you know, this
is interesting, and I can use some of these
concepts to build the next generation. We looked
at Columbia. I looked at every new town. And we
looked at them very clearly. But Columbia was the
best. I've seen Jim Riles done the best job up to
that time. So we built on what he did to figure out
how we might do better. That's what it's all about.
Well, I think that's the end of it. Is it fair for me
to raise a question? Yes, please do. Why don't you
comment about the need the fact that there hasn't
really been a big hit as far as an industrial
relocation here, something that creates,
instantly, 300, 400, 500 jobs? Well, it's
difficult because Houston was noted for energy,
of course. And before we started, Shell had
already done the big thing for the west side. Now,
the energy corridor did all the work. A lot of
companies went out the west side. We had a few in the
north side. I mean, we had a few here. But that's
where all the pace was. because energy is 70, 70% of
our whole life blood up to the last fall down. So if
they already had that, I never could figure out why
the hell they'd go on the west side and they
couldn't get to the airport. I mean, that always
puzzled me. Well, we think that'll change because
we're near a town now, the toll road's in, we're
better shaped than they are at that time. We think
that'll change. However, what you call the
instinct of, to follow who was out there. The herd
instinct. The lemming instinct, as I call it.
Yeah, the herd. That's why they did a lot of the big
hits there. And we have some things looking now.
Now the commercial's going to look good again.
We'll get some big hits for the next year or two. But
you do not anticipate any mass production, mass
employment type activities? No, I'm not
interested in 5,000 people or anything. That
really doesn't. I do think that, I don't think we'd
have the land to do 10,000 to 15,000 people.
But I do think we have land nearby that they could
live in the woodlands instead of what they have
five, six miles away to build a big thing like
you're talking about. This is my last question.
What has been your, in terms of personal pleasure,
I guess, and enjoyment and personal challenge,
energy? Or the woodland. I've often wondered
that. I think restoring galveston has been
interesting. Yeah, that's undoubtedly
exciting. I think energy, of course. I haven't
drilled so many wells and so many wildcats. It's
been a very important thing. And the woodland. I
think really the most important thing I'm working
on now is to use the Advanced Research Center. It
could be something that... You know, I use this
parallel, and I'm not... I'm sincere about it.
People don't see it, I guess. I came here when the
medical center was a prairie. And
it now has 52 institutions, several billion
dollars of structures, 60,000 people working,
11,000 professionals. The Youth Advanced
Research Center in 40 years could be that
important to the region. If the full universe
would work with me. If they don't know how to get it
out of the universities, they don't know how to get
it out. And therefore, if they'll work with us and
we evolve, And if I get support, see, my problem is I
have no consistency. I don't have 40,000
graduates like A&M has, or 10,000 at Rice, or U of H,
30,000. How do we get the foundation to understand
what we're trying to do? We're trying to do the next
level. Houston Advanced Research Center is the
most important thing I'm working on, of all of
these things. All the other I've worked on, in my
opinion, if it works. I don't know if it's going to
work there. How do you really get these four
universities, University of Texas is also
included, too, A&M, U of H, and Rice, to say, all
right, we're going to build this next level of how
we take this technology transfer, how the talent
comes out of our universities to help you reach
this area, this country, to help the country to
start moving ahead on the global competition of
technology. Now that, I think, is very important.
That's exciting. And that is the most difficult
thing I have to convince the Foundation of
Houston, because the third generation made all
that money out of energy. And they put it back in the
HGO, put it back in the ballet, which is good
because we do that ourselves now. But they should
remember their $500 million fortune came out of
energy. And they put very little back in
technology of energy. And we've got a big
technology center over there, and I get very
little support because I can't get them to
understand what we're trying to do. And this, I
think, is a youth advanced research center really
is another role model that the nation should use
more of. Now, we're just beginning. It's
embryonic. It'll take five years to let me tell you
what I think it's going to work on. But so far, it's
doing quite well. But it's a very small one. We have
to support most of it. And I think that it bothers me
that I can't get the support, but I can't get the
message out to them. I can't even get A&M to
understand. Oh, really? I would think President
Mobley would be better. Mobley understands it
very well, and he wants to help. They're very
protective and jealous. But you see, then I get to
the dean level down below. Dean says, hell, I can do
it all at College Station. Let me give you a good
example.
We have that high of this stuff. We did all the basic
research on superconductor supercollider. I
don't know if people know that here. Peter
McIntyre, who you probably know at A&M, the one
that came down, did a very interesting story. He
was the Fermilab for the experiments. And then
they had the big session in Snowmass in 1983. that
they have every year, all the high-energy
physicists get together to have a workshop. And
they came up with the superconductor,
supercollider, the most important project that
should be done in the nation. Then they
reconfirmed it in 84. So Peter says, I'm going to
get it to Texas. So he comes to talk to Vandiver at
that time. And Vandiver, you've lost your mind.
That thing's too big for the A&M. Go see Skip Port.
He's over at the experiment station. So he goes to
Skip Port. And Skip Porter just happened to just
come. We just started hard to come on our board. He
said, we can't do this thing. That's too big. Go
down and talk to George Mitchell. He's got a full
university trying to work with him on a consortium
that maybe will be a new project that none of them
can do individually. So Pete was smart. I don't
know if you heard this story, Joe. He got Glasshaw,
Sheldon Glasshaw, the developer of the
department, that's coming down with electric
heating, to come see me. So Sheldon came in the
room. I went to this office downtown at that time.
Michelle said, I'll tell you what, Mr. Mayor. She
says, we're going to build a texatron. We want you
to come up with $2 billion, and we're going to find
oil 40 miles below the ground. Zap these
particles. I said, come on, I'm a geologist. Don't
give me this crap, Michelle. Don't give me this
crap. What is a ureteron? I said, well, all right,
OK. We're trying to build a texatron. They wanted
to call it the texatron. We want Texas to happen.
Peter was anxious to do it. He said, what do you do? I
said, well, what is it, Peter, you think you can put
together? He said, I think I can get the full
universe that you now have with HAARP just
starting. He said, I got two at Rice. I got one at U of
H, Ryanstein. I got one at two at A&M. And where can
you put this thing together? And when I get the DOE
money to do the research on the magnet. I said,
well, Peter, what do you need? He said, well, we
need a place to work. We need to have a consortia
coming together. and we need $1.6 million of your
money to help get started. All right, we'll go
ahead and we'll do that for you. So that's where
they came here to Hark. And then they got the DOE
contract to do the magnet design, the superferg
magnet, which they didn't accept. I mean, which we
did everything it's supposed to, but they picked a
more technical magnet. They still haven't held
making it work. I was going to say, it doesn't work.
It doesn't work. We got really got eggs on our face.
But anyway, so what happened then? Then we got
Governor White. I was on a science and technology
committee with Skip. Skip came to the president at
that time of the park. We went and met in front of 16
people of the science and technology committee,
and none of them understand what the hell we're
talking about. None of them knew a damn thing about
it. So Governor White said, all right, I'll give
you $400,000 to do the siting studies between the
four universities. So we had Bureau of Economic
Geology work with us and all the other
institutions, look at 14 sites we picked around
the state. And then we did that work. Then we got the
state to put the billion dollar issue, and we
helped light the bill. We educated, then when
White was gone, Clemens came in, he called Skip, he
said, come up and tell him what the hell this SSC is
all about. So Skip went up there and spent four
hours with him. He didn't know a damn thing about
it. He said, hell, we're going to get this deal.
That's what Clemens said. Now here we are, four
universities, with not over eight or ten
high-energy scientists, competing against
Fermi Lab with 250 scientists, with Berkeley with
another 150 scientists, with Brookhaven with
another 150 scientists, and 35 states, and win.
How did we win that $8 billion project, which went
to Washington? It was just fine. We knew it was a
good sign, and we had other signs. How in the hell
did Texas win that thing? Because we, had we not
done the work and hard Texas wouldn't have been in
the competition. They wouldn't have known what to
do. It's there. We have some documents on that
we're going to include in the... It's very
important. In fact, Skip will give you, after we
finally won the award for Texas, I had them all get
together for four hours. brains of Peter, and we
brainstormed the chronology. I have that. We have
that. We will include it in this book. And the
governor gave us a big award. He gave me one, and
gave Peter McIntyre one, and Russ Hewson an award
for bringing the SSC to Texas. Now, it isn't the SSC
to Texas. It's how did we do it? How did the
entrepreneurship gall to think that this little
embryonic group of eight high-energy physicists
could beat the 35 states and all these great
institutions around the country. Now, that's the
message that you have to carry on that, is really
how these things are done. So this is the story of
the SSC. And that's why the Houston Advanced
Research Center could be one of the most important
things we have in this region. If I get the support
of the universities, which I have locally in
Cunningham, I make the meetings, I have them. But
when I get to the Dean's on down, then that's where
it comes. But I'll tell you the story that's
interesting, too, about why the wood is
important. So in this area, Ann M. called me one
day. I'll tell you what. I just hired. This is going
to run out in just a minute. I'm going to flip it
over. In fact, let me go ahead and do that right now
before you tell that story.